Reflection: Data Contexts: Economics


Overview
Data, or information of various kinds, is special, as it holds an undated potential for universal application. As ‘Open Science’ and other collaborative perspectives are highly relevant for the  acceleration of scientific progress, it becomes increasingly important to take crucial decisions while collecting, curating and analyzing data across all fields (Crow). The obstacles to Data sharing and reuse span across various categories (NYU Health Sciences Library), forging Data Management as the overarching activity that can help magnify impact by streamlining procedures across collection, curation and sharing of data (Zee #). Specialized knowledge and skills are necessary to build a data management plan, which forms the backbone for a well-informed research project (Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research). They are also a prerequisite to understanding the potential uses of data and handling it with care to context, to be aware of legalities surrounding data sharing and privacy, as well as provide expert guidance on long-term data storage, security and risks (M. #). As Mons aptly outlines, many of the world’s hardest problems can be tackled only with data-intensive, computer-assisted research (Mons). With more data generated per second than ever before, the complexities within these broader tasks evolve quickly and have consequences that outlive the interests of their decision-makers. Educating researchers to become knowledgeable in efficient data management is futile and time-consuming as data stewardship evolves rapidly, demanding specialized knowledge, skills and regular updation. As governments and public bodies across the world become increasingly aware about the need for data protection and privacy, the seriousness of well-informed data management gains legal and ethical interests in addition to long-term application and reusability of data (Open Data Charter). Data stewardship was born out of these needs, and expert handling of data is more useful than ever. Factoring-in the cost for these services, thus becomes an integral part of well-planned research projects expecting to generate and utilize quality data (Charles Beagrie Ltd #). 


The cost of Data Management services
In keeping with other evolving fields, there are no hard and fast rules for costing data sharing requirements, as some research projects will pay more attention to detailed data documentation, organisation and formatting than others as part of routine fieldwork or preparation before analysis. Much also depends on the long-term storage, preservation and publication plans beyond the duration of the research itself (“UK Data Service - Data management costing tool and checklist”). UK Data Service’s Data costing tool and Utrecht University’s Cost of Data Management inspired by the former, are very similar and provide an exhaustive list of parameters for researchers to consider while shaping their own Data management costs (“UK Data Service - Data management costing tool and checklist”) (Utrecht University). EPFL’s Cost Calculator for Data Management takes a more practical approach and is curated in the form of a calculator capable of totalling expenses across various heads. It is also noteworthy that this tool provides a drop-down list of popular service providers within each category, while also allowing manual input (Masson #). 


Data management costs: my social research project
My research project generates qualitative data regarding adolescent boys’ sensitivity to gender equality, masculinity and gender-based violence. Through various pen-and-paper surveys, three central measurement tools collect quantitative and qualitative answers to questions that help measure their attitudes, skills and actions within topics of interest. Additional video and audio data are generated through interviews with participants’ parents that help understand their social support systems. For the purpose of accurate data analysis from these tools, I would propose to retain a majority consent and collection, cleaning, and basic formatting of data within the core team of researchers. Transcribing video and audio recordings also would remain with the team. Though these are time consuming and rudimentary activities, they provide the team inputs that are required to make meaningful inferences from the data and helps shape the initial direction of our analyses and results. Consent is central to many of our research activities as we work with minors from under-served communities. Members of the on-ground data collection team are required, by policy, to brief involved parties and confirm their consent. Outside of these core data-related activities, the core research team can avoid distractions from auxiliary data-decisions through the employment of skilled data stewardship to take over data digitization, storage, back-up, security and access. Key decisions regarding roles and responsibilities, data sharing, metadata description, file formatting and storage could be carried-out by the data management service based on a direction set by the research team and primary funding agencies. This mix of self-owned and outsourced data management could prove to be the most optimal use of resources skilled across various specialties. Considering our work generates and involves sensitive data, it becomes more prudent to employ professional data management services to pay attention to any special legal and ethical concerns that may arise (Drachsler) (Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research).
