Reflection: Data Preservation and Repositories


Overview
Long-term storage and preservation of data helps us retain a version of information collected from core research that is relatively free from the biases of analyses. Data sharing also allows us to re-use or combine data in far more efficient ways to further scientific discovery (Nature Video). While the scientific community has made progress in building coherent structures for the preservation of publications, preserving research data still has many undefined facets (Tjalsma). Research conducted by millions of organizations around the world generates an unfathomable amount of data, which is crucial to overcome setbacks caused by irreproducibility and duplication (Carlson and Anderson 635-651). In addition to the scientific perspective of advancement, research and resultant data management involve financial and social decisions that shape the versatility of their relevance across time (Open Data Charter).


Exploring data preservation and storage decisions
Data collection, analysis, storage and dissemination are the pillars upon which modern research projects are built. As mentioned by Professor Christine Borgman, anything around us can be treated as data if we chose to, which gives us an idea of the magnitude of data that exists in the environment (University of California). Unfortunately, within the realistic limitations of data preservation, researchers are faced with the hard choice of choosing parts of their research data worth the economic and futuristic activity of long-term preservation. The DANS and DCC guidelines highlight some of the common considerations to help make this choice, including (but not limited to) the uniqueness of data, cost of reproducibility, legal and ethical sharing guidelines, as well as future applications (Tjalsma) (Whyte and Wilson). While these are primarily defined by the data itself, it is important to make certain larger boundaries regarding potential data preservation while planning for the research project to ensure that collection, cleaning and formatting of the data provide maximum flexibility for the choice of long-term preservation.


Fundamentals of a good repository and making a choice
The need for data repositories define the most fundamental features that every good repository must have, broadly - accessibility, long-term preservation and relevant information. It is important to note that while most data repositories have varying degrees of these features, the ones that provide most versatility in terms of accessibility, most economic costs for preservation and most focussed results during the search for relevant information are touted best in the competitive market. The choice of data repository begins from the research data itself, with Intellectual Property Rights (IPR), ethics, re-usability and technological composition becoming crucial markers (Whyte and Wilson). While there are thousands of repositories to choose from with individual merits, I find those without the reliability of preservation to be most problematic (“Registry of Research Data Repositories”). As mentioned during the lecture series, I am keenly sensitive to repositories like the U.S Government data repository with minimum accountability for stored data, necessitating long-term storage on local drives (U.S Government). This is a particularly harsh fate for research data that has been assessed to be unique and valuable to warrant long-term storage. While choosing an online repository for my own research data, which contains information about gender-based education of at-risk, adolescent boys in India, I would opt for Zenodo in order to provide me the balance between sharing technical analysis information (including software and github repositories with related codes) as well as basic-form CSV files containing quantitative data (Zenodo). The data generated is already suitably anonymised by my organization to promote ethical sharing of information arising from personal details. In addition, this commonly visited repository could promote more visibility for our research data via focussed searches.


References
1. Carlson, Samuelle, and Ben Anderson. “What Are Data? The Many Kinds of Data and Their Implications for Data Re-Use.” Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, vol. 12, no. 2, 2007, pp. 635-651. Oxford Academic, https://academic.oup.com/jcmc/article/12/2/635/4583061.
2. Nature Video. “Is There a Reproducibility Crisis in Science?” Scientific American, 25 May 2016, https://www.scientificamerican.com/video/is-there-a-reproducibility-crisis-in-science/. Accessed 28 May 2016.
3. Open Data Charter. “International Open Data Charter.” ODC, Open data charter, 2015, https://opendatacharter.net/principles/. Accessed 01 01 2015.
4. “Registry of Research Data Repositories.” re3data.org, Registry of Research Data Repositories, 2021, https://doi.org/10.17616/R3D. Accessed 11 04 2021.
5. Tjalsma, Heiko. “Selection of Research Data.” dans.knaw.nl, Data Archiving and Networked Services (DANS), 2011, https://www.dans.knaw.nl/nl/over/organisatie-beleid/publicaties/DANSselectionofresearchdata.pdf. Accessed 2011 01 01.
6. University of California. “University of California Libraries: Research Data Matters.” Youtube, UCMercedLibrary, 06 May 2016, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Lr722k7NyGU. Accessed 11 04 2021.
7. U.S Government. “The home of the U.S. Government’s open data.” Data.Gov, -, https://www.data.gov. Accessed 11 04 2021.
8. Whyte, Angus, and Andrew Wilson. “How to Appraise and Select Research Data for Curation.” DCC How-to Guides, Edinburgh: Digital Curation Centre, 2010, -. DCC, https://www.dcc.ac.uk/guidance/how-guides/appraise-select-data.
9. Zenodo. “Zenodo.” Zenodo, -, https://zenodo.org. Accessed 11 04 2021.