Reflection: Understanding Data storage options and needs


Overview
Storage and management of data become important concerns with the ideas of ‘Open Science’ and other collaborative perspectives rising in popularity and need within the scientific community. These decisions are best prepared in the planning phase of the project, including crucial choices pertaining to collecting, curating and analyzing data across all fields (Crow). The obstacles to Data sharing and reuse span across various categories (NYU Health Sciences Library), and forging Data Management as the overarching activity that can help magnify impact by streamlining procedures across collection, curation and sharing of data (Zee). This is also a prerequisite to understanding the potential uses of data and handling it with care to context, to be aware of legalities surrounding data sharing and privacy, as well as provide expert guidance on long-term data storage, security and risks (M.). As Mons aptly outlines, many of the world’s hardest problems can be tackled only with data-intensive, computer-assisted research (Mons). With more data generated per second than ever before, the complexities within these broader tasks evolve quickly and have consequences that outlive the interests of their decision-makers. As governments and public bodies across the world become increasingly aware about the need for data protection and privacy, the seriousness of well-informed data management gains legal and ethical interests in addition to long-term application and reusability of data (Open Data Charter). Factoring-in the cost for these services, thus becomes an integral part of well-planned research projects expecting to generate and utilize quality data (Charles Beagrie Ltd). Much depends on the long-term storage, preservation and publication plans beyond the duration of the research itself (“UK Data Service - Data management costing tool and checklist”).


Defining three essential storage options
The Data Hub
The Data Hub is the go-to place for the core data within an enterprise. It centralizes the enterprise's data that is critical across applications, and it enables seamless data sharing between diverse endpoints, while being the main source of trusted data for the data governance initiative. Data hubs provide master data to enterprise applications and processes. They are also used to connect business applications to analytics structures such as data warehouses and data lakes.
The Data Lake
The Data Lake is a single store of all structured and unstructured enterprise data. It hosts unrefined data with limited quality assurance and requires the consumer to process and manually add value to the data. Data Lakes are, in general, a good foundation for data preparation, reporting, visualization, advanced analytics, data science and machine learning.
The Data Warehouse
The Data Warehouse is a central repository of integrated and structured data from two or more disparate sources. This system is mainly used for reporting and data analysis, and is considered a core component of business intelligence. Data warehouses implement predefined and repeatable analytics patterns distributed to a large number of users in the enterprise (El Harrab).
The best combination for our research needs
My research project generates qualitative data regarding adolescent boys’ sensitivity to gender equality, masculinity and gender-based violence. Through various pen-and-paper surveys, three central measurement tools collect quantitative and qualitative answers to questions that help measure their attitudes, skills and actions within topics of interest. Additional video and audio data are generated through interviews with participants’ parents that help understand their social support systems. While there is an increasing ambiguity in the services offered (Friedman and Heudecker) under each of these storage related activities, for the purposes of my research project, I would prefer to make the use of a Data Lake, where all the raw data from different data collection tools can be stored together in an unstructured format. This activity, I feel, increases the possibilities for future research directions that may not yet be very clear. This application of raw data may be highly beneficial in this niche line of research as the data available has very low possibilities of being collected again, and are indicative of the time-period that they belong to. Data warehousing might also provide an interesting solution to futuristic research applications by making available other relevant data from the industry and interesting directions for application. Additionally, the data provided by our research project on to the warehouse may significantly help with decision making in related fields of research. 
________________


References
1. Charles Beagrie Ltd. User Guide For Keeping Research Data Safe. Charles Beagrie Ltd., 2011. Charles Beagrie Ltd. Version 2 July 2011, https://www.beagrie.com/static/resource/KeepingResearchDataSafe_UserGuide_v2.pdf
2. Crow, Michael M. “We Must Tear Down the Barriers That Impede Scientific Progress.” Scientific American, 18 December 2020, https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/we-must-tear-down-the-barriers-that-impede-scientific-progress/. Accessed 18 December 2020.
3. El Harrab, Youssra. “How to differentiate a Data Hub, a Data Lake and a Data Warehouse.” Semarchy, 2020, https://blog.semarchy.com/how-to-differentiate-a-data-hub-a-data-lake-and-a-data-warehouse. Accessed 09 03 2021.
4. Friedman, Ted, and Nick Heudecker. “Data Hubs, Data Lakes and Data Warehouses: How TheyAre Different and Why They Are Better Together.” Data Management Solutions, Gartner, 2020, -.
5. M., Martone. Data Citation Synthesis Group: Joint Declaration of Data Citation Principles. San Diego, CA, 2014. Force 11, https://www.force11.org/datacitationprinciples.
6. Mons, Barend. “Invest 5% of research funds in ensuring data are reusable.” Nature, 25 February 2020, https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-00505-7. Accessed 25 February 2020.
7. NYU Health Sciences Library. “Data Sharing and Management Snafu in 3 Short Acts.” Youtube, 19 December 2012, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N2zK3sAtr-4. Accessed 19 December 2012.
8. Open Data Charter. “International Open Data Charter.” ODC, Open data charter, 2015, https://opendatacharter.net/principles/. Accessed 01 01 2015.
9. “UK Data Service - Data management costing tool and checklist.” UK Data Service, 2015, https://ukdataservice.ac.uk/media/622368/costingtool.pdf. Accessed 01 September 2015.
10. Zee, Time Van Der. “Open Education Science.” AERA Open, vol. 4, no. 3, 2018, p. 0. Sage Journals, https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/2332858418787466.